UNFINISHED INFORMATIVE ESSAY VERY ROUGH DRAFT

Viennese Actionism was an informal, avant-garde art movement that occurred in Austria from 1960 to 1971. It was made up primarily of four members, although there were others involved; Günter Brus, Rudolf Schwarzkogler, Hermann Nitsch and Otto Muehl, who partook in performances- referred to as “aktions”- which were short, violent, and occasionally illegal. Actionists often used organic materials in place of paint, such as blood, urine, faeces, and animal organs, and “painted” human bodies rather than canvases. They are considered some of the most extreme performances artists of the 20th century, if not of all time.
It is important to understand the environment from which Actionism was conceived to fully appreciate what the artists were doing. At the beginning of the 1960s, Vienna was still recovering from two world wars and Soviet occupation, which had lasted for ten years. There is little English documentation of conditions during this era, but when the Austrian government reformed in 1955, they were regarded by the artists as authoritative and controlling, a fascist state. Their art was intended to challenge conformity, conventional art, and the perceived perception of suppression of the trauma caused by World War II. The actionists themselves had all formally studied art at university, although not all completed their education, and only Muehl was old enough to have fought in the war. Actionism coincided with the “happenings” in New York and the international “Fluxus” movement.
The earliest Actionist pieces in the early 60s were untitled paintings by Günter Brus which feature wild black brushstrokes on a white canvas. Around this time, Brus developed more interest in the process of painting itself rather than the final product. Otto Muehl’s early works question the canvas, and pieces such as an untitled 1963 involve its desecration, and Hermann Nitsch had been involved in performance art since 1950, when he founded the “Theatre of Orgies and Mystery”. Rudolf Schwarzkogler is the only primary member who does not have any paintings documented, as most of his work was in photography and film.

In 1962, the first performative action Blutorgel Aktion (Blood Organ Action) was recorded as a collaboration between Nitsch and Muehl in Muehl’s basement over the span of three days. During the action the artists created splatter paintings using animal blood in lieu of paint and ultimately disembowelled and crucified a dead lamb upside down. Of course, the gratuitous violence and blasphemy inspired outrage amongst the conservative, Christian public, but this was only the beginning for the Actionists.
Gunter Brus’ performed his first public action, Wiener Spaziergang (Vienna Walk) in 1965 which is one of the most well-known and provocative Actionist performances, yet also, surprisingly, the least horrifying. Intending to challenge an uninformed audience, Brus painted himself entirely white with a black stripe down the middle and walked down a street. After only a few metres, police intervened and demanded he pay a fine. The piece is notable for how Brus’ arrest became inextricably interwoven with the performance itself, to the point where it is now considered part of its legacy- part of his intention, as he explicitly chose to showcase the photographs of arrest at galleries. 

After this, the Actionists realised that pushing the boundaries of the law could also be incorporated into their work; Brus most notably was arrested multiple times for public indecencies and endangering the public, with every transgression more outrageous than the last. Walking down the street in odd attire wouldn’t do anymore- in 1968, Brus, Muehl, and two other contributors Peter Weibel and Oswald Wiener violently interrupted a student gathering at the University of Vienna and self-mutilated, self-flagellated, masturbated, urinated, and covered themselves in their own faeces, and vomited- while singing the Austrian national anthem. This infamous action was called Kunst und Revolution (Art and Revolution). The movement started to disband after this as participants fled to escape prosecution. 
Some actions followed this such as Piss Aktion, 1969 in which, live on stage, Muehl stripped naked and urinated into the mouth of Brus, but the final formal performance before the movement disbanded in 1970 was Stress Test by Brus, his first performance utilising real violence (previous works only feigned it). He drank his own urine, slashed his shaven head with a knife, and tested his own tolerance for pain. The bodily mutilation in this piece, and often present in the Actionists’ art (although virtual) could be interpreted as a reclamation of the pain they experienced and witnessed during the war.
The only other main member is Rudolf Schwarzkogler. Despite the focus the other artists placed on live performance, Schwarzkogler worked exclusively with film and photography, carefully rendering each scene. His work is typically set in some disturbing clinical setting, in which bandages are suffocating and medical tools are used to lacerate the subject, and occasionally strong shapes like large white spheres dominate images. Due to the common theme of castration in Schwarzkogler’s work, a myth was conceived and widely believed that he accidentally committed suicide by slicing his own penis open during a performance, although the violence in Schwarzkogler’s work is all fake and in reality he died by falling out of a window in what appears to be an accident. 
